Jednog je jutra Pale ustao vrlo rano.
One morning, Pale got up very early.

Nije mu se više spavalo pa se izvukao iz kreveta.
He was no longer sleepy, so he got out of bed.

Svuda je vladala tišina, ali on se nije bojao.
There was silence everywhere, but he was not afraid.

Sunčane zrake veselo su titrale po podu i zidu i Pale nije bio nimalo više pospan.
The sunbeams were cheerfully flickering on the floor and the wall, and Pale was no longer sleepy.

Pale se tiho odšulja kroz hodnik u sobu u kojoj su spavali tata i mama.
Pale quietly sneaked through the hallway into the room where dad and mom were sleeping.

Ali njihovi kreveti su bili prazni.
But their beds were empty.

Pale se zapitao u čudu – gdje su tata i mama.
Pale wondered in amazement - where are dad and mom.

Ipak se nije zabrinuo.
However, he was not worried.

Vratio se u svoju sobu, umio se i obukao – ta on je već gotovo veliki dječak i umije se sam urediti.
He returned to his room, washed up, and got dressed – he's already a big boy and can tidy up by himself.

Odlučio je da siđe na ulicu, na igranje.
He decided to go outside to play.

Zavirio je još jednom u sobu i u kuhinju, ali nigdje nije bilo nikoga.
He peeked into the room and the kitchen one more time, but there was no one anywhere.

Pali se upravo svidjelo što je tako rano sam kod kuće.
Pale liked being home alone at this early hour.

Dječak siđe niza stepenice i nađe se na ulici.
The boy descended the stairs and found himself on the street.

Doduše, nije smio silaziti na ulicu bez dozvole, ali tate i mame nije bilo kod kuće i on je otišao da ih potraži.
Well, he wasn't allowed to go out without permission, but dad and mom weren't home, so he went to look for them.

Na ulici, upravo pred Palinom kućom, stajao je tramvaj.
On the street, right in front of Pale's house, there was a tram.

Pale zaviri u kola, ali u njima nije bilo nikoga, ni putnika, ni konduktera, ni vozača.
Pale peeked into the tram, but there was no one inside, no passengers, no conductor, no driver.

Gdje su samo svi ti ljudi?
Where have all the people gone?

Pale uđe u mljekarnicu, ali i ona je bila potpuno prazna.
Pale entered a dairy store, but it was completely empty.

Nema prodavača, nema kupaca.
No salesperson, no customers.

I na ulici nema nikoga, ni žive duše.
And there was no one on the street, not a soul.

Ne voze automobili, ne voze tramvaji, ne prolaze ljudi.
No cars were driving, no trams, no people passing by.

Nigdje nikoga.
Nowhere was there anyone.

Nigdje ni jednog čovjeka, ni jednog čovječuljka.
Nowhere a single person, not a single little person.

PALE JE SAM NA CIJELOM SVIJETU!
PALE WAS ALONE IN THE WHOLE WORLD!

I ostale prodavaonice u Palinoj ulici bile su prazne.
The other stores on Pale's street were also empty.

Pale uđe u slastičarnicu i osladi se mliječnom čokoladom.
Pale entered a pastry shop and enjoyed some milk chocolate.

Zatim uđe u prodavaonicu voća i pojede dvije banane.
Then he entered a fruit store and ate two bananas.

Nije mogao više jesti pa spremi dvije naranče u džep.
He couldn't eat anymore, so he put two oranges in his pocket.

On dobro zna da se to ne smije raditi ali sad je potpuno sam na svijetu i može uzeti sve što mu se sviđa.
He knows he shouldn't do this, but now he's completely alone in the world, and he can take whatever he likes.

Pale se nađe ponovo na ulici i ugleda nova tramvajska kola broj dva s prikolicom.
Pale found himself back on the street and saw a new tram with the number two and a trailer.

Ah, tramvaj!
Ah, a tram!

Pale ih je volio više od svega.
Pale loved them more than anything.

Zato uđe u kola, sjedne na vozačevo mjesto i počne se igrati vozača.
So he entered the tram, sat in the driver's seat, and started playing driver.

Micao je ručke na lijevoj i desnoj strani i dang! Tramvaj krene niz ulicu. Pale se prestraši i shvati da je postao pravi pravcati vozač.
He moved the handles on the left and right, and dang! The tram started moving down the street. Pale got scared and realized he had become a real driver.

Stavi na glavu vozačku kapu.
He put on the driver's cap.

Bila je tako velika da ga je poklopila do ušiju.
It was so big that it covered his ears.

Pale je malen i ne može doseći nogom zvono.
Pale is small and can't reach the bell with his foot.

Ali nije ni potrebno.
But it's not necessary.

Ulice su puste i nema bojazni da bi mogao koga pregaziti.
The streets are empty, and there's no fear of running anyone over.

Pale je vozio prema Trgu.
Pale drove towards the square.

Bio je sretan što može voziti tramvajska kola.
He was happy that he could drive tram cars.

Bio je sretan što je sam na cijelom svijetu i što može raditi sve što mu se prohtije.
He was happy that he was alone in the whole world and could do whatever he pleased.

Na Trgu je stajao drugi tramvaj.
At the square, there was another tram.

Trebalo je zaustaviti kola, ali Pale to nije umio, i tako je naletio na tramvaj što je stajao na tračnicama.
He had to stop the tram, but Pale didn't know how, so he collided with the tram on the tracks.

Sletio je sa sjedala i odletio na pločnik, ali se nije ozlijedio.
He fell off the seat and onto the sidewalk, but he wasn't hurt.

Tramvaj je bio potpuno razbijen.
The tram was completely wrecked.

Pale se tješio da to i nije neka nesreća – kad bi zaželio ponovo voziti, mogao bi slobodno uzeti druga kola, jer ih ima dosta na ulicama, a sva stoje njemu na raspolaganju.
Pale comforted himself that it wasn't such a big disaster – when he wanted to drive again, he could freely take another tram, as there were plenty on the streets, and they were all at his disposal.

Činilo mu se toga časa da je najljepše od svega biti sam na svijetu.
At that moment, it seemed to him that the best thing was to be alone in the world.

Možeš raditi sve što ti srce zaželi i nema nikoga tko bi te kaznio.
You can do whatever your heart desires, and there's no one to punish you.

Pale krene dalje.
Pale continued on.

Nađe se pred velikom bankom u koju ljudi spremaju novac.
He found himself in front of a large bank where people store their money.

Uđe unutra i uzme puno vreću novca – ta on je sam na svijetu i sve je njegovo.
He entered and took a bag full of money – after all, he's all alone in the world, and everything belongs to him.

Pale pjeva od sreće da se sve ori.
Pale sang with joy, and it echoed all around.

Sada ima toliko novaca da može kupiti sve, sve što god zaželi!
Now he has so much money that he can buy everything, everything he wants!

Može imati nožić i usnu harmoniku, može imati dizalicu i bicikl i avion i kolica i auto i uopće sve na ovome svijetu!
He can have a pocket knife and a mouth harmonica, a crane, a bicycle, an airplane, a cart, a car, and everything in the world!

Pale izabere u izlogu nožić i uđe u trgovinu da ga kupi.
Pale chose a pocket knife from the store window and entered the store to buy it.

Ali u trgovini nema nikoga kome bi platio. Uvidi da mu novci ništa ne vrijede.
But there was no one in the store to pay. He realized that his money was worthless.

Zato razbaca sav novac po ulici jer njima nije mogao ništa kupiti.
So he scattered all the money on the street because he couldn't buy anything with them.

Prolazeći dalje ulicama Pale je našao novu zabavu – prekrasni crveni vatrogasni auto s ljestvama.
As he continued through the streets, Pale found a new amusement – a beautiful red firetruck with ladders.

Bez razmišljanja uđe u auto i sjedne za volan.
Without thinking, he got into the truck and sat at the wheel.

Ba-bu-ba-bu-ba-bu! – oglasila se sirena čim je Pale počeo pritiskati dugmad i vući zavore.
Ba-bu-ba-bu-ba-bu! The siren sounded as soon as Pale started pressing buttons and pulling levers.

Tada je proradio motor i auto se pokrenuo.
Then the engine started, and the truck moved.

Mali je vozač čvrsto držao volan i nije se nimalo bojao.
The little driver held the steering wheel firmly and wasn't afraid at all.

Ta to je ionako sve samo šala.
Because it was all just a joke anyway.

Pale je lako zaokretao uglovima.
Pale easily maneuvered through the corners.

Prokrstario je cijeli grad ali nije mogao naći nikakav požar.
He cruised around the whole city but couldn't find any fires.

Nigdje ništa nije gorjelo.
Nothing was burning anywhere.

Na kraju se vatrogasni auto zaustavi sam od sebe.
In the end, the firetruck stopped on its own.

Valjda se potrošio sav benzin.
It must have run out of gas.

Pale izađe iz auta i krene u park u kojem se obično igrao s ostalom djecom.
Pale got out of the truck and went to the park where he usually played with other kids.

Prošetao se po travnjacima.
He walked on the lawns.

Spazio je ploču s natpisom „ČUVAJ TRAVNJAKE“, ali je mislio: To se mene ništa ne tiče, ta ja sam sam na cijelom svijetu.
He noticed a sign that said "KEEP OFF THE GRASS," but he thought, "That doesn't concern me; I'm all alone in the world."

Na dječjem igralištu je bila ljuljačka i Pale se poželi ljuljati.
There was a swing at the playground, and Pale wanted to swing.

Kad bi barem ovdje bila „našla sam“ i Mališa!
If only he could find "I Spy" and Mališa here!

Pošao je dalje i došao do kinematografa u kojem se obično prikazuju dječji filmovi. Ušao je unutra.
He continued on and reached a cinema where they usually showed children's movies. He went inside.

U dvorani je bio mrak i platno je bilo prazno.
The hall was dark, and the screen was empty.

Nije bilo nikoga tko bi prikazivao film.
There was no one to show the film.

Pale je ogladnio.
He got hungry.

Već odavno nije ništa jeo.
He hadn't eaten anything for a long time.

Pošao je u hotel i našao se u kuhinji.
He went to a hotel and found himself in the kitchen.

Sve što je našao bilo je hladno, a nije bilo ni sasvim skuhano.
Everything he found was cold, and nothing was completely cooked.

Tada je pokušao nešto skuhati sam.
Then he tried to cook something himself.

Uzeo je posudu, nasuo krupice i nalio mlijeka, zapalio plin i počeo miješati.
He took a pot, poured in some semolina, added milk, lit the gas, and started stirring.

Miješao je i miješao, a kad se umorio, skinuo je posudu s plamena. Kušao je, ali kašica se nije mogla zahvatiti žlicom.
He stirred and stirred, and when he got tired, he took the pot off the flame. He tasted it, but the porridge couldn't be scooped with a spoon.

Jadni Pale, ostao je gladan!
Poor Pale, he remained hungry!

Više ga uopće nije veselilo što je sam samcat na cijelom svijetu.
He didn't enjoy being all alone in the world anymore.

Zaželio se prijatelja, zaželio se tate i mame.
He longed for friends, for dad and mom.

Najviše se zaželio mame.
He missed mom the most.

Brzo sjedne u neki auto i proveze se kroz grad, ne bi li našao koga.
He quickly got into a car and drove through the city to find someone.

Tako je stigao na aerodrom.
That's how he arrived at the airport.

Na travi je stajao veliki putnički avion. Pale se popeo u avion, upalio motor i poletio.
There was a large passenger plane on the grass. Pale climbed into the plane, started the engine, and took off.

Letio je visoko, visoko kroz bijele i sive oblake. Avion je letio sve više, dok nije udario u nešto tvrdo.
He flew high, high through white and gray clouds. The plane kept climbing until it hit something hard.

Čini se da je udario u Mjesec.
It seems like it hit the Moon.

Jadni Pale, padao je duboko, duboko prema Zemlji.
Poor Pale, he was falling deep, deep toward Earth.

Onda je strahovito kriknuo i... našao se u svom krevetu.
Then he screamed loudly, and... he found himself in his bed.

Upravo se probudio.
He had just woken up.

Pomislio je:
He thought:

Pa ja sam sve to samo sanjao!
I just dreamed it all!

Što ti je, Pale, što plačeš? – dotrčala je brzo mama.
What's wrong, Pale, why are you crying? - his mom quickly ran over.

Ah, mamice, ja sam sanjao, da sam bio sam na cijelom svijetu i da sam mogao raditi sve što sam htio.
Oh, Mom, I dreamt that I was all alone in the world and could do whatever I wanted.

Ali bio sam sasvim sam i nigdje nije bilo nikoga, ni tate... ni tebe.
But I was all alone, and there was no one, not even dad... not even you.

Dodijalo mi je biti sam na cijelom svijetu.
I got tired of being all alone in the world.

Dobro je što sam to samo sanjao!
It's good that I just dreamed it!